The strength stone of Nauris-Oskari
[KUVA]
The strength stone of Nauris-Oskari lies at the end of the stable building at Kaunislehto Open Air Museum in Hyrynsalmi, Finland. The stone weighs is in at 116.6 kg (257 lbs) and according to the museum has been used in various strength contests from pass-time activity among the farm workers in early 1900's to local strongman contests in the more recent decades [LÄHDE].
Challenge
As the story tells, Nauris-Oskari took to ask the hand of the beautiful daughter of the house Peltola [PELTOLA?] but was turned down. In a fit of fury he grabbed a nearby large stone and carried it for 250 meters all the way to the gate of the house. Nauris-Oskari's incredible feat brought shame to the house Peltola as none of the members were able to carry it back and eventually the stone was left at the gate of the house.
Today, Nauris-Oskari's stone stands in the museum yard, telling the tale of the frustrated suitor's burst of strength
[TIETOA VOIMALAJIKISOISTA JA MAHDOLLISISTA TULOKSISTA]
[Karttakuva]
History
In many Finnish sources describing historical stone lifting a common name for the stones is väkikivi. In Finnish folklore, the word väki refers both to physical strength and to a kind of inherent force or power associated with natural elements or beings. A väkikivi is thus a stone used to test strength, but the name also carries echoes of this older belief in hidden forces.
People especially in the lower casts of the society were at the time more often called by various nicknames they had acquired and thus Nauris-Oskari -  literally Turnip-Oskari -  … [TAUSTOITUS NAURIS-OSKARILLE?]
Location
[KUVA]
Nauris-Oskari's strength stone sits at the end of the stable building facing the barn at the Kaunislehto Open Air Museum in Hyrynsalmi, Finland. The museum is open during the summer from early June to late July. According to the museum staff the stone is liftable also outside of the opening hours given a respectful visit to the historic location and adherence to basic stone lifting etiquette but the museum guides are happy to give out more information about the history of the location and Nauris-Oskari's stone
References
